GWEN IFILL: Good evening. I'm
Gwen Ifill. Judy Woodruff is
away. On the "NewsHour" tonight:
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States: But if we act
here and if we act now... GWEN
IFILL: President Obama joins
hundreds of world leaders in
Paris, calling for an ambitious
agreement to combat climate
change. Also ahead: the first in
our weeklong series from
Nigeria, where the country is
battling the brutal group Boko
Haram. DR. GERIDA BIRUKILA,
UNICEF: We have children who
have arrived, and they lost
their voice because of what they
saw. It seems that the war still
rages in their mind. GWEN IFILL:
And this Politics Monday: truth
on the trail, parsing facts in
the race for the White House.
All that and more on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour." (BREAK) GWEN
IFILL: The place is Paris. The
subject is global warming. The
goal is the strongest agreement
yet to rein in rising
temperatures. What could be
difficult talks on the issue
began today. FRANCOIS HOLLANDE,
French President (through
translator): On this first day
of the conference, we have our
backs against the wall. GWEN
IFILL: The summit opened with a
warning from its host, French
President Francois Hollande.
FRANCOIS HOLLANDE (through
translator): This wall is built
on all our egoisms, our fears,
our resignations. This wall is
built on indifference,
recklessness, and weakness. But
this wall can be scaled and it
all depends on us. GWEN IFILL:
In all, 151 heads of state and
government converged on the
French capital. They're hoping
to finalize an accord on
reducing heat-trapping emissions
of greenhouse gases. But the
Paris attacks loomed in the
background, as President
Hollande argued the problems of
climate and security are linked.
FRANCOIS HOLLANDE (through
translator): They're two big
world challenges that we have to
overcome, because we have to
leave our children something
more than a world free of
terror. We owe them a planet
preserved from catastrophe. GWEN
IFILL: To underscore the point,
after arriving last night,
President Obama paid a visit to
the Bataclan concert hall, one
of the sites of the attacks.
Today, he was among the first to
speak, and he spoke hopefully of
a turning point on more than
just climate. BARACK OBAMA,
President of the United States:
Let that be the common purpose
here in Paris, a world that is
worthy of our children, a world
that is marked not by conflict,
but by cooperation, and not by
human suffering, but by human
progress, a world that's safer
and more prosperous and more
secure and more free than the
one that we inherited. GWEN
IFILL: A similar effort
collapsed in Copenhagen six
years ago, but, this time, many
countries committed to action in
advance. Last year, Mr. Obama
pledged to reduce U.S. carbon
emissions by 26-28 percent below
2005 levels over the next
decade. And China, the world's
largest greenhouse gas producer,
has said it will slash emissions
by at least 60 percent by 2030.
For any deal to be meaningful,
India, the world's third largest
emitter, would have to make
solid cuts as well. But Indian
Prime Minister Narendra Modi
said today developing nations
need room to grow. NARENDRA
MODI, India Prime Minister: We
have to ensure, in the spirit of
climate justice, that the life
of a few doesn't cloud out the
opportunities for the many still
on the initial steps of the
development ladder. GWEN IFILL:
Chinese President Xi Jinping,
speaking at the summit, echoed
that concern and called for
addressing economic differences.
XI JINPING, Chinese President
(through translator): Countries
need to increase dialogue,
exchange best practices and
achieve common development
through mutual learning. At the
same time, countries should be
allowed to pursue their own
solutions that best suit their
respective national conditions.
GWEN IFILL: The U.S. joined
Canada, Germany, Italy and
others today in committing $250
million for poorer nations.
President Obama also announced a
private sector initiative led by
Microsoft founder Bill Gates and
other billionaires to boost
investment in clean energy.
Still, any broad agreement in
Paris will not take the form of
a legally enforceable treaty.
But German Chancellor Angela
Merkel called for transparent,
credible commitments. ANGELA
MERKEL, German Chancellor
(through translator): We need a
United Nations framework that is
binding, and we need binding
reviews. We know that the
agreements are made voluntary,
but it's also important that we
also stick to what we have
promised. GWEN IFILL: The Paris
conference is set to run through
December 11. We will explore
what's at stake in Paris in
detail after the news summary.
And in the day's other news,
even as the climate conference
convened, a choking smog filled
the air in Chinese cities,
prompting hazardous pollution
warnings. Beijing had its worst
air quality of the year, and
officials ordered an orange
alert, the second-highest level.
Schools suspended outdoor
activities, while factories had
to cut back on output. WOMAN
(through translator): The smog
is a very serious problem. In my
opinion, this is the consequence
of having too many cars. There
should be more measures to fight
this. MAN (through translator):
I have installed air filters at
home. When I leave home, I put
on a mask. And, in my car, I
also installed an air purifying
system. GWEN IFILL: And in
India, heavy smog also blanketed
New Delhi, cutting visibility to
a mere 200 yards. Air quality in
the Indian capital routinely
gets worse in the winter, when
more coal fires are burning.
Investigators in Colorado shed
no light today on the case
against Robert Lewis Dear. He's
accused of killing three people
at a Planned Parenthood clinic.
There was no discussion of
motive as Dear had his first
court appearance, via video link
from jail. He's being held on
suspicion of murder. In
Baltimore, jury selection began
for the first of six police
officers charged in the Freddie
Gray case. He died in police
custody last April, triggering
protests and riots. Officer
William Porter is charged with
assault, manslaughter and
reckless endangerment. And a
judge in Chicago set bond at
$1.5 million for a white officer
charged with murdering a black
teenager. Squad car video showed
officer Jason Van Dyke shooting
the victim, Laquan McDonald, 16
times. Release of that video led
to days of protests. In Israel,
a judge has convicted two Jewish
teenagers of beating and burning
alive a Palestinian teen last
year. The attack in Jerusalem
was part of a chain of events
leading to the Gaza war. The
judge today delayed a verdict
for the alleged ringleader of
the killings after he filed a
last-minute insanity plea. But
the victim's father vowed to
pursue justice. HUSSEIN ABU
KHDEIR, Victim's Father (through
translator): I don't trust those
Israeli courts because they rule
differently for Arabs and
Israelis. We will pursue them.
If the Israeli court won't try
them, we want something more
than a life sentence. We will go
to the International Court of
Justice. GWEN IFILL: The two
convicted minors are expected to
be sentenced in mid-January.
Pope Francis spent the final day
of his Africa trip in the
Central African Republic
delivering a message of peace
and reconciliation. The pontiff
visited Muslims in the capital
city, where conflict between
Muslim and Christian militias
has raged in recent years. He
said religion can never justify
violence. Turkey refused today
to apologize for shooting down a
Russian fighter jet last week,
despite the threat of new
sanctions by Moscow. In
Brussels, the Turkish prime
minister met with NATO officials
and said again his country's
actions were justified. AHMET
DAVUTOGLU, Turkish Prime
Minister: If the Russian side
wants to talk, and wants to
prevent any future unintentional
events like this, we are ready
to talk anything. If they want
to improve relations, normalize
relations in all sense, we are
ready to talk. But no country
can ask us to apologize because
of doing our job. GWEN IFILL: In
Paris, Russian President
Vladimir Putin charged that
Turkey's real motive was
protecting oil supplies coming
from Islamic State forces inside
Syria. In Washington, the State
Department urged both sides to
de-escalate tensions. Back in
this country, the Environmental
Protection Agency is requiring
more ethanol and other renewable
fuels in gasoline next year. The
rule issued today is a victory
for farm states over oil
companies and environmentalists.
It could also become an issue in
Iowa's presidential caucuses.
And concerns about holiday
spending weighed on Wall Street,
after Black Friday sales fell
from last year. The Dow Jones
industrial average lost 78
points to close below 17720. The
Nasdaq fell nearly 19 points.
And the S&P 500 slipped nine.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
what stands in the way of
addressing climate change;
terrorism, war and corruption,
the human toll in Nigeria; truth
or fiction on the campaign
trail; and much more. The
climate talks over the next two
weeks are expected to become a
turning point in the global
debate over addressing the
causes of a rapidly warming
planet. The lofty speeches have
already begun, but what do
leaders gathering in Paris this
week hope to accomplish? And
what could get in the way? We
check in with Seth Borenstein, a
science writer for the
Associated Press. He joins us
tonight from Paris. And Michael
Levi is with the Council on
Foreign Relations. He's the
director of its Program on
Energy, Security and Climate
Change. Gentlemen, welcome to
you both. Seth Borenstein, what
are all these nations gathered
in one place hoping to
accomplish this time? SETH
BORENSTEIN, Associated Press:
Well, this time, they're hoping
to come up with some kind of
deal, a binding deal that could
reduce the amount of carbon
emissions coming from
fossil-burning fossil fuels.
They have tried year after year,
and have failed year after year
in the past. GWEN IFILL: When
you say binding, I just want you
to clarify that. Do you mean
binding on nations to hit
certain targets, binding on
nations to come up with certain
amount of money? Binding in what
way? SETH BORENSTEIN: That's the
key question. Everyone says they
want something binding, but it's
sort of, what do you mean by
binding? And that's one of the
issues that's going to be hashed
out here. It does involve lots
of new money, billions of
dollars, if not eventually
trillions. It involves all these
nations; 181 nations have made
pledges: Here's what we're going
to do individually. Now the
binding part is holding them to
these pledges, a system to
monitor these pledges, and
perhaps, if you're not reaching
these pledges, what do you do?
And then it's all got to be
designed so that it doesn't go
through the U.S. Senate, because
it can't go through the U.S.
Senate because of American
politics. GWEN IFILL: And
American politics means that
that requires a two-thirds
ratification in the U.S. Senate,
and that's unlikely to happen. I
want to ask Michael Levi about
what we have seen in the past.
We have been to these meetings
before in Cancun and in Rio and
Kyoto and Copenhagen. Is this
one any different? MICHAEL LEVI,
Council on Foreign Relations: I
think this one is different. I
think it's different because
we're starting to set realistic
goals for what these summits can
accomplish. We used to go to
these expecting to take a global
emissions cut that everyone
needed to reach and negotiate
over how to divide it up, then
everyone would go home and
execute that. It was kind of
like old-style arms control
negotiations. I would get rid of
this many missiles. You would
get rid of that many. We would
go home, we would do it. It
turns out that climate change
isn't like that. Leaders can
agree to whatever they want, but
actually changing the energy
economy is incredibly difficult.
And it's a lot more like a
domestic policy problem, a
domestic politics problem than
it is like a traditional foreign
policy, national security issue.
So, what's different this time
is that, instead of putting the
burden on Paris to solve the
problem, negotiators are asking,
how can we build an
international agreement that
helps countries solve the
problem themselves? How do we
help them cut their emissions
more deeply? How do we help them
adapt to climate change? I think
that makes this fundamentally
different. GWEN IFILL: Would you
say -- Mr. Borenstein just
talked about the money which has
to be committed here. What would
you say would be the potential
major sticking point in the next
11 days? MICHAEL LEVI: I think
the biggest sticking point is
likely to be over money. When we
saw the clash in Copenhagen six
years ago, the ultimate turning
point was over money. This is
money that comes from wealthier
countries to help poorer
countries adapt to climate
change, deal with the damages
caused by climate change, and
transition their energy
economies. And it speaks to a
basic political reality, which
is, if you're from a poor
country and you go home from the
climate summit, and you say, we
have got some pledges, countries
are going to take action in the
next 10 years, and that's going
to help us avoid dangerous
climate change in the next 50,
your people are going to look at
you and say, what does that mean
to me today? If you come back
with pledges of aid, in
addition, then that's a stronger
political proposition. If you
look at the basic politics of
how this works, it leads you to
money. GWEN IFILL: Seth
Borenstein, we did hear,
speaking of money, today we
heard private sector giants with
names like Gates and Bezos and
Zuckerberg promise to make a
commitment to a green energy
fund. Does that change this in
any way? Or is this something
for the U.S. to trumpet? SETH
BORENSTEIN: This is something
quite a bit different than in
previous years. You are seeing
-- and this has happened in the
last couple of years, but it's
especially happening now --
private industry money, business
is -- they're stepping up and
they're probably doing more than
many countries, and that's
helping. They're seeing sort of
the reality of the economics and
climate change. And they're
saying, if we're going to -- if
you're going to do something,
let us volunteer, instead of you
impose, and let us help do
something with technology. So, I
mean, what you're looking at is
both technology and business are
dramatically different than,
let's say, 1997 in Kyoto. Those
are two of the biggest reasons
why many people are optimistic
this time, because the
technology is so different, has
improved so much, and your --
and the business community, much
of the business community is on
board now. GWEN IFILL: Michael
Levi, I want to ask you about
two countries, not the U.S.,
involved in kind of whether this
will succeed or not. One is
China and the other is India.
How do you begin to take into
concern their concerns or their
desire to make this happen or
stop it from happening? MICHAEL
LEVI: Well, I think the China
front, at least when it comes to
the diplomacy, is relatively
bright. The United States tried
before the Copenhagen talks to
get on the same page with China,
but for the most part didn't
succeed, and the two countries
clashed sharply at the
Copenhagen summit. This time
around, they seem to be
considerably more successful.
They had an announcement last
year of mutual emissions-cutting
targets. They had another this
year that put them on a similar
page for the Paris summit.
Beijing is reacting to pressure
at home to cut local pollution,
and the desire from Xi Jinping
to find an area where he can
work constructively with the
world's biggest power in order
to build a more positive story
of great power relations in the
21st century. So, there, even
though China has big challenges
in actually cutting emissions,
and so does the United States,
the two have been able to get on
a similar diplomatic pledge.
They will clash a bit in public,
but I think they have a script
in private. I think India is
tougher. India is a far poorer
country than China. It is a
country that is going through
enormous transition. It's
impossible to predict what
Indian emissions or Indian
energy use will be in 10 years
without policy, let alone to
make promises about what will
happen to them with policy. And
India also guards its
independence jealously. Even if
it thinks it can cut emissions,
it's very wary of signing up on
a deal to do that, a bit like a
lot of people in the United
States. So, you will find India
is very sticky at these
negotiations. It's tough often
to deal with. It won't promise
all that much. But on the
ground, in practice, it's likely
to deliver considerably more.
GWEN IFILL: Seth Borenstein,
briefly on that, to that same
point, especially on the India
point. SETH BORENSTEIN: Well,
actually, I think you can't say
enough about China. China is the
-- we will get back to India in
a second, but China is the major
player here. They're the number
one carbon polluter by far. And
the difference between now and
Copenhagen is just night and
day. They are trying to be
leaders in all sorts of things,
especially in solar technology.
So they are one the reasons why
there are so many people
optimistic. India is the reason
why there are some people who
are still afraid things might
fall apart, because India is one
of these countries that still
wants to talk about the
rich-poor divide. There are a
lot of poorer countries that
continue the discussion of
developed vs. developing world,
and that helped cause problems
in Copenhagen. And they're
worried that this might crop up
now. And we're hearing little
glimmers of that here and there
now. GWEN IFILL: OK. Well, we
will be watching all this very
closely... (CROSSTALK) GWEN
IFILL: ... as I'm sure you will
too. Seth Borenstein of the
Associated Press and Michael
Levi of the Council on Foreign
Relations, thank you both.
MICHAEL LEVI: Thank you. SETH
BORENSTEIN: My pleasure. GWEN
IFILL: Tonight, we begin a
week-long series on Africa's
most populous country, "Nigeria:
Pain and Promise." Special
correspondent Nick Schifrin and
producer and cameraman Zach
Fannin spent more than a month
on the ground there, chronicling
a nation in the midst of an
encouraging and impressive
economic boom, but still plagued
by income inequality, corruption
and terrorism. This evening, we
look at the government's
attempts to wipe out Boko Haram,
a terrorist group that killed
more people in 2014 than the
Islamic State we hear so much
about. While the Nigerian
military has made significant
gains, the killings by the group
continue. As we report, some
civilians are getting caught in
the middle. A warning: Some of
the images in this report may be
disturbing. NICK SCHIFRIN: On
the outskirts of Maiduguri, the
men who protect the city fight
with whatever they can find,
40-year-old shotguns and iPhone
ear buds. Some carve their own
clubs. Others patrol in floral
and kitchen knives. What they
lack in weaponry, they make up
for in divinely inspired
confidence. There's a couple of
shotguns. There's a few
machetes, a few knives, but
that's it. ABBA AJI KALLI,
Civilian JTF: Yes. NICK
SCHIFRIN: I mean, what would you
actually be able to do if you
ran into Boko Haram out here?
MAN: We chased them out of
Maiduguri with stick and we
didn't even have a gun, and when
they have AK-47, they have RPG
on their hand, but we pushed
them out. ABBA AJI KALLI: God
has put the fear of the Civilian
JTF in their heart. Well done.
NICK SCHIFRIN:
Fifty-one-year-old Abba Aji
Kalli leads the civil JTF, for
Joint Task Force. He used to be
a government auditor. Today,
he's more comfortable on the
front lines. If we kept walking
this way, where would we end up?
ABBA AJI KALLI: If we kept
walking, we would end up in
Sambisa. NICK SCHIFRIN: In
Sambisa forest, their
headquarters? ABBA AJI KALLI: In
the forest is the Boko Haram
headquarters. NICK SCHIFRIN:
Down this road? ABBA AJI KALLI:
Down this road. NICK SCHIFRIN:
His men called call him elder.
That's him in dark gray on the
left. He and his vigilantes
round up suspects using their
own brand of justice. Their
biggest fear, boys and girls
carrying bombs. ABBA AJI KALLI:
They are using females to come
and detonate their bomb attacks
on us. So, if you see anybody,
do not take chances. NICK
SCHIFRIN: Those bomb attacks are
Boko Haram's primary weapons. An
intelligence official says the
groups detonated more bombs in
the last six months than the
previous six years. So many of
Boko Haram's targets today are
soft, like this mosque. A man
walked in here pretty much to
where I'm standing and blew
himself up as a group prayed.
The explosion was so powerful,
it obliterated the mosque's
roof. More than three-quarters
of the victims are Muslim. And
these attacks are grisly. A few
days after this one, and you can
still smell the blood that
stains the walls. Boko Haram
celebrates its attacks in slick,
ISIL-inspired propaganda. It
pledged allegiance to ISIL and
now calls itself the Islamic
State of West Africa. They
embrace ISIL's brutality. Last
year, the group captured Mubi
and made the city its
administrative capital. Its
leader, Abubakar Shekau,
preached from a local mosque.
And his fighters celebrated in
newly acquired Nigerian army
tanks. YA'U SA'EED, Nigeria:
Very, very dangerous for
everyone, because if you can see
the attacks, they have attacked
mosques, they have attacked
church, they have attacked
Christians, they have attacked
Muslims. They are very
dangerous. NICK SCHIFRIN: Ya'u
Sa'eed could be the most
courageous man in Mubi. When
Boko Haram arrived, he filmed
this video riding this
motorcycle into the stronghold
to rescue his mother. YA'U
SA'EED: I called my mom. She
said, they're hearing the sound
of gunshots everywhere,
gunshots. YA'U SA'EED: He
witnessed an exodus, a city of
140,000 people fleeing by any
means necessary. In total, more
than two million people have
fled Boko Haram since the
fighting began. What did
Nigerian army soldiers do when
Boko Haram attacked? YA'U
SA'EED: They do nothing. They
not do nothing when they
attacked Mubi. And that is
nobody, not any single person
have shot one single bullet.
NICK SCHIFRIN: But, today, the
Nigerian military is firing
back. It released this video
showing Boko Haram fighters
fleeing an air force attack. The
military success has redrawn the
map. At its peak, Boko Haram
controlled an area the size of
Belgium. Now it controls only
three remote towns and a final
stronghold, the Sambisa forest.
Military spokesman Colonel Rabe
Abubakar says this year the
military's been transformed.
COL. RABE ABUBAKAR, Nigerian
Defense Force: There has been
tremendous change from what it
used to be until now, morale of
the troops, equipment,
leadership. There will never be
any territory that will fall
back to Boko Haram's insurgency.
Never again. NICK SCHIFRIN: Mubi
might be recaptured, but the
reconstruction has barely begun.
Bridges bombed by Boko Haram are
still broken. Street vendors use
burned-out cars as fruit stands.
Many banks are still destroyed
and empty. Boko Haram looted the
cash to finance itself. Inside,
that red frame is all that's
left of the front door, those
papers all that's left of
depositors' accounts. Outside
the nearby Church of the
Brethren, the damage is
everywhere. Inside, high above
the podium, the fire set by Boko
Haram almost erased the cross
from the wall. Sixteen
parishioners died. Elia Usman is
the church's secretary. ELIA
USMAN, Church of the Brethren:
When these people landed in
Mubi, they would ask you, are
you a Christian or a Muslim?
When you say you are a
Christian, they will shoot you.
There's not one single church
left in Mubi. They bombed it.
NICK SCHIFRIN: But the streets
are busy. And those who fled
have returned, including Ya'u's
mother, Huraira Muhammad. Why do
you feel safe here? HURAIRA
MUHAMMAD, Nigeria: We are going
to the market. We are keeping on
with our lives. We are scared a
bit, but life must go on. KASHIM
SHETTIMA, Borno State Governor:
We want everybody to go back to
his or her village. We will
provide all the arsenals at our
disposal. NICK SCHIFRIN: Borno
Governor Kashim Shettima leads
the state at the epicenter of
this war. He vows to force all
internally displaced people, or
IDPs, to return home by May.
KASHIM SHETTIMA: The population
of Maiduguri has snowballed. And
it a powder keg waiting to
explode. So, I think it's in our
enlightened self-interest to
expedite action in rebuilding
the homes once they are back in
their communities. At least
their kids can go to school. Now
we are really bringing up a
whole generation of ignoramuses,
of idiots, illiterates. All our
schools are closed. All our
schools have been converted into
IDP camps. NICK SCHIFRIN: There
is nowhere in the world with
more children out of school. The
IDP camps are overflowing with
people and trauma. Hadiza is 17
years old. She was kidnapped by
Boko Haram and held for nearly a
year. In this war, the spoils of
the battlefield are often girls.
HADIZA, Nigeria: They came and
said they wanted to marry me. I
wanted to know who I was going
to marry. I didn't realize that
the one I was going to marry was
a member of Boko Haram. I didn't
know. By God, I didn't know he
was a member of Boko Haram. NICK
SCHIFRIN: Hadiza uses the word
marriage only out of shame. This
really isn't marriage, is it?
DR. GERIDA BIRUKILA, UNICEF: No,
it's rape. NICK SCHIFRIN: This
woman is a UNICEF public health
specialist based in Maiduguri.
DR. GERIDA BIRUKILA: Some girls
were raped by different men. So,
we know that, in any religion or
any culture, that is not
marriage. NICK SCHIFRIN: But for
Hadiza and hundreds of other
girls, the impact is permanent.
She's six months' pregnant. And
what will you tell your child
about his or her father? HADIZA:
I will -- my son that when Boko
Haram came, I met his dad. But I
realized he wasn't a good
person. NICK SCHIFRIN: How
traumatized are some of these
girls? DR. GERIDA BIRUKILA: We
have children who arrived, and
they lost their voice because of
what they saw. They saw the
killings of their parents. They
walked over dead bodies.
Although now they are safe, it
seems that the war still rages
in their minds. NICK SCHIFRIN:
Boko Haram also kidnapped this
boy. He is scared they will kill
his family if he reveals his
identity. I asked him his age.
He didn't know. BOY: They asked,
where is your father? They
asked, if we taught you our
values, and you met with your
father, would you kill him? NICK
SCHIFRIN: Boko Haram teachers
tried to indoctrinate him. Had
they succeeded, he would have
ended up a suicide bomber, or
like this teenager in a Boko
Haram propaganda video.
TEENAGER: Turning to Allah is
not difficult. So come and
follow his path. NICK SCHIFRIN:
Were you convinced by what you
learned from Boko Haram's
teachers? BOY: I didn't believe
what they said. How can I
believe them when they're
killing people? ROBERTSON: When
he escaped, the military found
him and accused him of being a
militant. He says they left
these marks on his arms. BOY:
They tied up my arms with rope
from a well. MAN: All of them,
they are Boko Haram members.
NICK SCHIFRIN: The military has
been accused of human rights
abuses and indiscriminate
arrests. This video is from
2013. All the people rounded up
by soldiers were thrown into the
most notorious facility in the
area, the army's Giwa barracks.
What is it like inside of Giwa
barracks? This woman insists she
is not Boko Haram. She spent one
year inside Giwa barracks and
was never charged with anything.
WOMAN: One of the female guards
was terrible. She doled out
perpetual beating and torture
that leads to death. NICK
SCHIFRIN: The army spokesman
didn't deny her allegations of
abuse. COL. RABE ABUBAKAR: It
could be that, yes, there could
be some isolated cases. But this
has been, in this dispensation,
in this president's leadership,
the emphasis is anybody, any
uniformed man who manhandled a
civilian anywhere either on the
war front or anywhere, please
report, and we will take
appropriate action against that.
NICK SCHIFRIN: But it's not
clear that's possible, when the
victims say they're threatened
into silence. Were you told
never to talk to anyone about
what happened to you in Giwa
barracks? WOMAN: They told us,
keep your mouth shut. Don't talk
about anything you saw here.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Eventually,
Nigeria will win the battle
against Boko Haram, but the
years of torture, rape, and
kidnapping leave open wounds.
The larger war won't be won
until those wounds are healed.
Nick Schifrin, "PBS NewsHour,"
Maiduguri, Nigeria. GWEN IFILL:
And you can tune in tomorrow for
Nick's next report on "Nigeria:
Pain and Promise," this one
about the nation's status as the
continent's biggest economy.
Stay with us. Coming up on the
"NewsHour": finding religion in
unexpected places, how one man
is ministering to Baltimore's
children through boxing. But,
first, separating truth from
fiction in the race for the
White House. Political director
Lisa Desjardins reports. LISA
DESJARDINS: A candidate's words
count. Or, at least, they're
supposed to. But as the
presidential campaign grinds on,
that rule is being severely
tested. Example: what Republican
Donald Trump said about a month
ago on President Obama's plan to
resettle Syrian refugees on U.S.
soil. DONALD TRUMP (R),
Presidential Candidate: And now
I hear we want to take in
200,000 Syrians. LISA
DESJARDINS: In fact, the actual
number is just 10,000. In
another incident last week,
Trump appeared to mock New York
Times reporter Serge Kovaleski
and his physical disability
during a campaign rally. DONALD
TRUMP: You got to see this guy.
Oh, I don't know what I said.
Ah, I don't remember. LISA
DESJARDINS: Asked about it
afterward, the candidate said,
"I certainly do not remember
him." In fact, Kovaleski says
they once knew each other on a
first-name basis. Rivals,
including Ohio Governor John
Kasich, point to Trump's words
as a sure sign he's unelectable.
GOV. JOHN KASICH (R-OH),
Presidential Candidate: Calling
names of women, and Muslims, and
Hispanics and mocking reporters,
then saying, I didn't do it, but
he did do it, it's just not
going to happen. LISA
DESJARDINS: Another Republican,
Ben Carson, raised eyebrows this
weekend after touring Syrian
refugee camps in Jordan. He
offered this assessment on ABC:
BEN CARSON (R), Presidential
Candidate: We're hearing that
they all want to come here to
the United States up. And that's
not what they want. They want to
go back home. LISA DESJARDINS:
And this from Ted Cruz. He said
Sunday that it's too early to
link anti-abortion rhetoric to
the accused Planned Parenthood
shooter in Colorado. SEN. TED
CRUZ (R-TX), Presidential
Candidate: It's also reported
that he was registered as an
independent and as a woman and a
transgender leftist activist, if
that's what he is. LISA
DESJARDINS: In politics,
accuracy and truth can be
casualties. And now pressure for
candidates to stand out and for
voters to scrutinize will only
increase. The opening contests
in Iowa and New Hampshire are
just two months away. For the
"PBS NewsHour," I'm Lisa
Desjardins. GWEN IFILL: And it's
time for politics Monday. So,
Amy Walter of The Cook Political
Report and Tamara Keith of NPR
are here to sort it all out. OK,
Tamara, you get the short straw
this week, because I have to ask
you just straight out whether it
feels like there is an epidemic
of untruthfulness under way in
this campaign. TAMARA KEITH,
National Public Radio: I think
that there is a backlash against
fact-checking that has -- that
started in 2012 and has really
taken hold. And I think that you
can attribute this to a couple
of things. One, I think the
public generally believes
politicians are going to lie on
some level, and so truth is a
fuzzy thing in campaign
politics. And, two, the public
doesn't really believe the
media. Something like 60 percent
of people polled say that they
don't trust the news media to
accurately and fairly report the
news. Well, if people don't
trust us to accurately and
fairly report the news, then
fact-checking -- then the
candidates have very little to
fear. GWEN IFILL: Here is what
puzzles me. People have access
to information unfiltered by the
media more so than ever before,
and, yet, somehow, when you
confront somebody -- like,
today, Chris Christie, the
former governor of New Jersey,
said that Donald Trump's claims
that there were Muslims
celebrating in New Jersey after
9/11 were not true, that it
didn't happen. And Donald
Trump's response is, yes, it
did. AMY WALTER, The Cook
Political Report: Right. So how
are going to you refute that?
And you say, well, as we have
seen journalists do, show us the
proof of it. Well, I know it's
proof because I have heard
people tell me that it was the
truth. Where's the
documentation? GWEN IFILL:
Because I told them. AMY WALTER:
Because I told them. It goes
back to something that Tamara
said too. It's not only that
people don't trust that the
media is telling them the truth.
It's that everybody has their
own definition of what the media
is and what truth is. And if you
live in a silo, which more and
more Americans now are living in
these siloed sort of realities
of they get their news from
sources that agree with them.
They listen to people who agree
with them. They unfriend people
on Facebook who disagree with
them. Then all you're doing most
of your day is getting your
world view just told back to you
and you're never challenged on
it. So, of course it's -- how
can you tell me that my truth
isn't my truth? TAMARA KEITH:
Well, and you take the Trump
9/11 rumor. Well, if you go
search on the Internet -- you
want to be unfiltered, go search
on the Internet, you can find
lots of Web sites that for years
have been spreading that
Internet rumor. GWEN IFILL: OK,
so this interesting, because we
have always known that people
think that the media might not
be telling the truth or that
politicians are not telling the
truth. But now we seemed to have
reached another level. So,
today, we saw kind of another
spectacle in the lobby of the
Trump Tower, where Donald Trump
met with black clergy, some of
whom had already supported him,
but many of who hadn't, and the
Trump folks had said it was
going to be an endorsement. It
kind of wasn't. What was it? AMY
WALTER: Well, he said it was --
I don't -- like most of this
campaign, I don't think we
really know what this was. GWEN
IFILL: Yes. AMY WALTER: What it
started out was, was as an
attempt for Donald Trump to talk
about something else, which is
he's very good at doing, which
is, as soon as he gets
criticism, let's go and change
the subject. In this case, I
think the subject being he's
racist, he's making statements
about people that are over the
top. OK, I will show you, says
Donald Trump. I'm going to bring
together all these black clergy
who are going to endorse me,
until it turns out that they
said, well, actually, we're not
here to endorse you. We thought
we were invited to just talk to
you. Then Donald Trump changes
his tune and says, well, maybe
it's just a meeting. GWEN IFILL:
Well, let's talking about a real
endorsement that did happen.
Chris Christie, who has been
struggling in this campaign, but
he got the endorsement of The
New Hampshire Union Leader, the
state's largest newspaper.
TAMARA KEITH: He did. And this
has proven helpful for other
candidates in the past. They
have gotten a boost in their
poll numbers. GWEN IFILL: You
mean President Gingrich?
(LAUGHTER) TAMARA KEITH: Yes,
exactly. Now, Gingrich was the
one that -- it hasn't been a
great predictor of the next
nominee or the next president of
the United States. But here's
Chris Christie. He's basically
taken up residence in New
Hampshire. He's betting his
whole game on winning in New
Hampshire and then having
something to propel him forward.
When you're at 5 percent, you
will take whatever you can get.
It's not a negative. GWEN IFILL:
OK. AMY WALTER: Yes. I mean, New
Hampshire is notorious for doing
a couple of things, one, for
being the counterweight to Iowa.
So, what Iowa does, they sort of
pick the opposite of that, and
witting until the last minute.
Most than half of the voters in
the 2008, 2012 campaign decided
in the last week of the election
who they were voting for. For
Chris Christie, look, this gives
him a good talking point to say,
it matters that I have stayed
here. I have put residence
basically down in the state,
even though I'm supposed to be
governor of New Jersey. But it
also shows how wide open the
so-called establishment side of
the equation is. GWEN IFILL:
Right. AMY WALTER: This is the
key for this campaign. We know
that there is the Donald Trump
factor, and he has consolidated
his support. He has about 25
percent. The problem is, there
is no anti-Trump that's
consolidated on the other side.
GWEN IFILL: Now, as
unpredictable as this election
has been, one of the predictable
things that Ben Carson did this
weekend was, what happens when
you don't have any international
experience? You go -- you take a
foreign trip, and he went to
Jordan. TAMARA KEITH: He did.
And he met with Syrian refugees
in refugee camps in Jordan. He
came out of it, I think, with
the same conclusion that he went
into it with, was that -- which
was that there are other ways to
deal with refugees from Syria
than to bring them to America.
He said that they don't want to
come to America, they want to go
back to Syria. And I'm sure many
people will say, I want to go
home. I want to be able to go
home. So he went in, he went to
Jordan. He did what many past
presidential candidates have
done with mixed records. I don't
know that it changed anything.
AMY WALTER: Well, I don't -- I
still think the questions were
raised in his Sunday talk show
interviews about, well, OK, what
is your strategy then for the
war in Syria, for the war
against ISIS? And it still was
as vague as it has always been,
so it's not as if he brought
with him any more specifics. And
this is still his biggest
problem. GWEN IFILL: And,
finally, we of course heard --
every now and then, life or news
interferes in the campaign. And
in this case, the issues of guns
and abortion, both hot-button
issues in a Republican primary
especially, but also on the
Democratic side, came together
in the Planned Parenthood
shootings in Colorado. We didn't
hear from Republicans for a
while. We heard from Democrats
right away linking the two. What
did they -- how did they handle
that? AMY WALTER: Well, it's
become almost so predictable. If
you have guns and abortion or
any other cultural issue, it
hits the media, it hits Twitter,
it hits Facebook, and,
instantly, each side goes into
its camp, and they make
assumptions about what happened,
they make accusations, and
everybody just sort of gets in
their camp on this side, gets in
their camp on that side. We
retain our silos through the
end. TAMARA KEITH: Yes. Watching
this play out on Twitter, it
was, like, ah, we're in America
and America is deeply, deeply,
deeply divided. GWEN IFILL: And
until there is actually a court
appearance or something else,
and we still don't know -- we
end up where we started. Who
knows what truth is, right?
(CROSSTALK) AMY WALTER: Yes.
GWEN IFILL: Amy Walter -- there
used to be rules. Amy Walter of
The Cook Political Report,
Tamara Keith of NPR, thank you
both very. TAMARA KEITH: You're
welcome. GWEN IFILL: In just a
few minutes, we will be back
with a look at how a boxer is
working to reduce violence in
Baltimore. But, first, take this
moment to hear from your local
PBS station. It's a chance to
offer your support, which helps
keep programs like ours on the
air. (BREAK) In Baltimore today,
jury selection began in the
first trial against six police
officers related to the death of
Freddie Gray. A small group of
protesters demonstrated outside
the courthouse, in a city that
is still healing. One church in
the Cherry Hill neighborhood is
offering a unique ministry. A
version of this piece was
originally produced by the PBS
program "Religion & Ethics
Newsweekly." MIKE MOSLEY, Head
Coach, Cross for Christ Boxing
Gym: My name is Mike Mosley. I'm
the head coach of Cross for
Christ here at Created For So
Much More Worship Center. All
right, you all get in the line
and look at this mirror. Bend at
your knees. Good. That's good. I
enjoyed fighting. Never was a
bully. So, I was talking to my
cousin one day. He said, you
know, they recently opened up a
boxing gym in the area. Put this
fist up. Always protect home.
Your face is home. BISHOP
WILLARD SAUNDERS, Created For So
Much More Worship Center: The
boxing program has become a
medium that is a part of our
ministry to help children, young
men and women, to be able to
reach their own potential
through an activity that creates
discipline. MIKE MOSLEY: How you
all late again? BISHOP WILLARD
SAUNDERS: And also creates
commitment. MIKE MOSLEY: Six
o'clock. Six o'clock. Six
o'clock. BISHOP WILLARD
SAUNDERS: And it really helps us
to be able to minister to them.
It's not even separate from our
ministry. It is our ministry.
And we have been able for the
past several years to see the
great success that it's had to
be able to get kids who would be
involved in violence in some
sort of way out on the street to
now come to the boxing gym and
be able to learn and to learn
the skill of boxing and also get
the word of God at the same
time. MIKE MOSLEY: I haven't
even lived a life half as rough
as some of these kids. Every
minute that a kid is in this
gym, every evening that a kid is
in this gym, they are in a safe
zone. Jab your way in there.
There you go. There you go. They
are protected. I like that.
ISAIAH ROBINSON, Boxing Student:
Boxing isn't about anger or
violence. It is more about
technique and flow. It lets me
reach myself. It keeps me out of
the streets. It keeps me busy.
ASANTE TATE, Boxing Student:
Boxing is not about aggression
at all. It made me humble as a
young teen. It kind of took me
away from the immaturity and
outside of the gym, and kind of
brung me closer to, you know,
different people. And it kind of
-- it made me see the world a
different way. When I came in
here, like, I felt like I
belonged here, like I actually
became a part of this family.
MIKE MOSLEY: My hope for the
kids is just to awaken something
in them that can't be put to
sleep. One of the first kids
that I worked with and helped
with skills Dante (ph) become an
assistant coach. To see a kid
who used to be on the street
making money in ways that
weren't legal, to see him
working with the kids and
spending his time and giving
them his gifts, his
intelligence, his skills, his
savvy, and really enjoying doing
that, that just makes me
ecstatic, because that is what
it's about. BISHOP WILLARD
SAUNDERS: Children in this
community don't know what
success looks like. They don't
know what love and discipline
look like together. They don't
know life. They don't know
death. They don't understand the
consequences of it, because that
piece of it has been missing.
Boxing doesn't just teach you
respect for your ability, but
respect for your opponent. You
can be defeated. They learn what
it feels like to fail in the
boxing gym, but they learn how
much harder they have got to go
back and work around come back
and be successful and to be able
to work at it. That gives you a
respect for life. It also gives
you a respect for death. And it
gives you, more importantly, a
respect for yourself and for
other human beings. MIKE MOSLEY:
I have a lot of dreams for this
gym, but my real dream and my
real hope is just for the kids.
This gym is my everything. In
life, there is so much
temptation. There's so much bad
out there, that it's hard to
know that you're doing the right
thing. I know 100 percent of the
time when I'm in the gym is the
right thing. And there's a
freedom in that. GWEN IFILL: On
the "NewsHour" online right now:
It's the 115th anniversary of
the death of Oscar Wilde. One of
the wittiest people of his day,
the Irish writer died at age 46.
But what did he die of? it's
probably not what most people
believe. Read that and more on
our Web site, PBS.org/NewsHour.
Tune in later tonight on
"Charlie Rose": sports-induced
brain trauma and the dangers to
young athletes. And that's the
"NewsHour" for tonight. I'm Gwen
Ifill. Join us online and again
here tomorrow evening. For all
of us here at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank you, and good
night.